05-settings.md, before:

# YAML Settings {#settings}

`bcbio` offers a rich suite of analysis tools, with [highly-customizable configurations](https://bcbio-nextgen.readthedocs.io/en/latest/contents/configuration.html#algorithm-parameters). The number of options can be overwhelming. Here, we provide exemplar files that should work for most standard analyses at the LSP. These should serve as a starting point, and users are expected to tweak the files to suit their particular needs.

* For the purposes of consistency with the rest of the guide, please name your configuration file `O2.yaml`
* If you downloaded and merged the reference for non-coding regions as [discussed previously](#refgenome), replace `GRCh38.cdna.all.fa.gz` with `GRCh38.95.fa.gz` in the examples below.
* In the YAML format, white space matters! When copying and pasting the examples below, please ensure that each line is properly indented.

## Digital Gene Expression

Copy and paste the following lines to your `O2.yaml`. Replace `abc123` with your eCommons ID and `myProject` with your project name.

```
details:
  - analysis: scRNA-seq
    algorithm:
      transcriptome_fasta: /n/scratch2/abc123/myProject/reference/Homo_sapiens.GRCh38.cdna.all.fa
      transcriptome_gtf: /n/scratch2/abc123/myProject/reference/Homo_sapiens.GRCh38.95.gtf
      umi_type: harvard-scrb
      minimum_barcode_depth: 0
      cellular_barcode_correction: 1
      positional_umi: False
    genome_build: hg38
```



## Deep RNAseq

Copy and paste the following lines to your `O2.yaml`. Replace `abc123` with your eCommons ID and `myProject` with your project name. Ensure that the Spike-in FASTA file matches what you [downloaded previously](#spike-in).

```
details:
  - analysis: RNA-seq
    genome_build: hg38
    algorithm:
      transcriptome_fasta: /n/scratch2/abc123/myProject/reference/Homo_sapiens.GRCh38.cdna.all.fa
      transcriptome_gtf: /n/scratch2/abc123/myProject/reference/Homo_sapiens.GRCh38.95.gtf
      aligner: hisat2
      strandedness: firststrand
      spikein_fasta:  /n/scratch2/abc123/myProject/reference/ERCC92/ERCC92.fa 
```

Commit message:

Option to download configuration yaml files directly

05-settings.md, after:

# YAML Settings {#settings}

`bcbio` offers a rich suite of analysis tools, with [highly-customizable configurations](https://bcbio-nextgen.readthedocs.io/en/latest/contents/configuration.html#algorithm-parameters). The number of options can be overwhelming. Here, we provide exemplar files that should work for most standard analyses at the LSP. These should serve as a starting point, and users are expected to tweak the files to suit their particular needs.

* For the purposes of consistency with the rest of the guide, please name your configuration file `O2.yaml`
* If you downloaded and merged the reference for non-coding regions as [discussed previously](#refgenome), replace `GRCh38.cdna.all.fa.gz` with `GRCh38.95.fa.gz` in the examples below.
* In the YAML format, white space matters! When copying and pasting the examples below, please ensure that each line is properly indented.

## Digital Gene Expression

For DGE, we recommend to use the following configuration file as a template. Copy and paste the the lines below to your `O2.yaml` or [download it directly](example_settings/dge/O2.yaml) using the command `wget https://github.com/labsyspharm/rnaseq/example_settings/dge/O2.yaml`.

In the downloaded file, replace `abc123` with your eCommons ID and `myProject` with your project name.

```{r, dge, echo=FALSE, result="asis", comment=NA}
cat(
  paste(
    readLines(file.path("example_settings", "dge", "O2.yaml")),
    collapse = "\n"
  )
)
```

## Deep RNAseq

For deep RNAseq, we recommend to use the following configuration file as a template. Copy and paste the lines below to your `O2.yaml` or [download it directly](example_settings/rna_seq/O2.yaml) using the command `wget https://github.com/labsyspharm/rnaseq/example_settings/rna_seq/O2.yaml`.

In the downloaded file, replace `abc123` with your eCommons ID and `myProject` with your project name. Ensure that the Spike-in FASTA file matches what you [downloaded previously](#spike-in).

```{r, rna_seq, echo=FALSE, result="asis", comment=NA}
cat(
  paste(
    readLines(file.path("example_settings", "rna_seq", "O2.yaml")),
    collapse = "\n"
  )
)
```
